---
title: "Week 8-9 Realsense D435 problems"
excerpt: "Figuring out how to solve problems with realsense d435"

sidebar:
  nav: "docs"

toc: true
toc_label: "TOC installation"
toc_icon: "cog"


categories:
- entries
tags:
- Realsense D435

author: Omar Garrido
pinned: false
---

### 1. Realsense problems

Since the Realsense D435 wasnt working properly using the realsense-realview application I try to figure out what was the problem.

- I did reinstall the realsense 2.0 SDK.
- The ouput of rs-enumerate-devices suggest that the recommended firmware was version 5.10.3. So I downgrade the firmware version, but the problem still persists.
- I found this link in the official web of intel [recommended configurations](https://realsense.intel.com/intel-realsense-downloads/#firmware), and tried the recommended configuration they suggest.
- To discard that there was an error with the SDK, drivers or the Ubuntu 16.04.05 LTS, i tried installing the drivers and SDK for Windows 10.
What I found on Windows 10 was that the problem was there too. So is probably not a problem of the SDK or drivers or OS but with the hardware. 
- Also looking in github I found that the USB type C that connects to the realsense also give some errors to some people and they fix it by inserting the usb to the realsense turning it, since a type C USB can be inserted in both sides. What I found is that on one side the realsense camera is detected as USB 2.0, allowing to record on low resolutions but stable. On the other side of the usb, the camera was detected as USB 3.0, allowing lots of configurations but once the streaming start it will fail and freeze the camera. Same problem in linux but the camera was always detected as USB 3.0 but on one side fewer configurations where allowed. The realsense-viewer application seems more stable on windows anyways as I can record on a resolution of 640x480 at 30 fps without problem with the camera as USB 2.0.

**Conclusion**: I see a few people on github with similar problems. After all this test I can almost assure that this is probably a hardware related problem and not a software problem. Probably a problem with the USB cable, having not enough bandwidth for example, or a problem with my 3.0 USB, since my  motherboard has an old USB 3.0 but I also have a USB 3.0 expansion PCIe card, so there should not be a problem with that. The last thing that comes to my mind is the camera itself, but since the problems seen are bandwith related I guess I can discard this.

